Replies from referees:

Your submission to Genome Biology - GBIO-D-16-00232
        
Feb 29 GBIO-D-16-00232

Evaluation of off-target and on-target scoring algorithms and integration into
the guide RNA selection tool CRISPOR Maximilian Haeussler, PhD; Kai Schoenig,
PhD; Hélène Eckert, PhD; Alexis Eschstruth, PhD; Sylvie Schneider-Maunoury,
PhD; Alena Shkumatava, PhD; Jim Kent, PhD; Jean-Stephane Joly, PhD; Jean-Paul
Concordet, PhD

Dear Maximilian,

Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript entitled 'Evaluation of
off-target and on-target scoring algorithms and integration into the guide RNA
selection tool CRISPOR' to Genome Biology. It has now been seen by two referees
and their comments are accessible below.

As you will see from the reports, the referees find the manuscript of potential
interest, but they raise serious concerns that the comparison described in the
manuscript is not exhaustive. In particular, both referees point out that a
number of recently published tools and datasets have not been included. Since
the main strength of the manuscript, in their opinion, is the thorough
comparison of the existing tools, we believe it is crucial that this point is
addressed. Additionally, both referees note that the number of experimentally
evaluated sgRNAs and off-target sequences are very small, and should be
increased. Finally, Referee 2 notes that it is important that the tools are
evaluated on an independent dataset. It seems to us to be essential that all of
the referees’ concerns are fully addressed, in the form of a revised
manuscript, before we can reach a final decision on publication.

When revising the manuscript, please also ensure that the manuscript is
formatted according to our instructions and that editable figures are provided
with the revised manuscript. Please see
http://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/submission-guidelines/research for
further details. Please note that if we decide to publish your manuscript we
will require that all data be submitted to a relevant repository with the
record publicly accessible and the accession numbers included in the Methods
section. We will also require that all scripts used in the study are either
included in the supplementary files or also deposited in a public repository
and referenced.

If you are able to fully address these points, we would encourage you to submit
a revised manuscript to Genome Biology.  Once you have made the necessary
corrections, please submit online at: http://gbio.edmgr.com/

Please include a cover letter with a point-by-point response to the comments,
describing any additional experiments that were carried out and including a
detailed rebuttal of any criticisms or requested revisions that you disagreed
with. Please also ensure that all changes to the manuscript are indicated in
the text by highlighting or using track changes.

We hope to receive your revised manuscript within the next six weeks or so.
Please let us know if the delay is likely to be longer than six weeks, or if
you have any problems or questions.

I look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.

Best wishes,
Rafal


Rafal Marszalek, PhD
Senior Editor
Genome Biology
http://genomebiology.com


Reviewer reports:

>Reviewer #1: The submission by Haeussler et al. collates previously-reported
>datasets and computational models to examine the on- and off-target effects of
>sgRNAs. They incorporate their findings into a website, CRISPOR, and also
>provide stand-alone code for those wishing to implement various algorithms
>independently. The main value in this manuscript is the comparison of multiple
>on-target prediction algorithms and off-target scoring schemes, not the least
>of which was the likely-herculean effort to collect the relevant parts from
>various publications and authors. This orgnization represents a valuable
>resource to the community, although there are several critical issues that need
>to be addressed before the manuscript would be suitable for publication.
A "herculean effort", thanks for that.  Reviewer #1 had many good suggestions.
We have never before received such an in-depth review. Thank you for your time!

>Major Points

>1) Unsurprisingly in a fast-moving field, several reports have recently
>appeared that should be included to ensure that this publication is not
>out-of-date before it even appears in print. (For example, it undermines the
>statement in the introduction that they have evaluated "all existing" datasets,
>pg. 5 line 34). In particular: 
>a. Wang et al., Science, Nov. 2015
Unfortunately, as they are a very recent dataset, Wang et al have already used
their own scoring algorithm to select guides. Their guides have very high Wang
scores. As a result, little information can be obtained from the correlation 
between assay result and prediction. The correlation is relatively low, ~0.130,
as a result. We have added to the methods:
XXXX

>Hart et al., Cell, Dec 2015 
We saw Hart 2015 but didn't want to change our manuscript directly before the submission.
The data is now added and it confirms the leading position of the Fusi et al score.
This dataset is somewhat special in that it contains so much data. 
WHY DID WE CHOOSE ONE TIMEPOINT AND AVG ?

>  - Wang et al
>  b. Mouse datasets from Koike-Yusa (NBT, 2014) and Doench (NBT, 2014) could also be evaluated.
We had them in the data files but removed from the figures for conciseness. Now added again.

>  c. Doench et al. Nature Biotech., Jan 2016 - In addition to providing more
>  on-target data, this proposes an improved off-target scoring scheme that
>  should be added in the comparisons in Figure 2. This report also encompasses
>  the Fusi/Doench on-target rules that the authors have already included in
>  their comparisons, which was originally available as a pre-print.
Yes, this CFD score was already on the CRISPOR website during the review, but only visible in the 
Excel downloadable tables. We have added it now to Figure 2 and indeed it is
better than the MIT score.  However, and this is something we struggle to
explain, when we're taking the sum of this new score, the total sum of all
offtarget scores for a guide should give the specificity of the guide.  When we
plotted this against the total number and total frequency of offtarget
cleavage, the new score is not better for ranking guides than the old MIT
score. This is why guides on the website are still ranked by MIT score, but
off-targets are now ranked by CFD score.
TODO: SHOW IN CRISPOR!

>2) How do the authors distinguish between datasets of poor technical quality
>vs. algorithms that do a poor job of predicting on-target activity? The
>datasets they have used are quite different in their size, delivery mechanism,
>whether they target endogenous genes or reporters, whether they select for loss
>of protein function or cell death, etc. The authors should not assume that all
>readers will be intimately familiar with these reports, so it would be
>well-worth their time to discuss the potential strengths and pitfalls of each.
>Related, a table could go a long way towards describing the features of various
>datasets. This is a critical point, as many readers will focus on figure 4 as
>the key take-away, which in its current form visually treats all datasets
>equally.
Supplemental Table 5 did summarize all datasets.

>3) Figure four is quite critical. Given the distinction made multiple times in
>the text about the differences between species (which may be methodological or
>biological), the authors should consider either break this up into multiple
>graphs (1 per species) or at least more clearly labeling the dataset name by
>species. 

>It might also be helpful to note where the scoring scheme is derived
>from the same dataset, to minimize the contribution of potential overfitting to
>the impression of the heatmap (perhaps including the value but coloring in
>gray?) 

>Also, the color scale goes from red to yellow to white, but at least my
>eyes initially missed the idea that white was best -- I was visually drawn to
>the most-red and most-yellow points, as white is usually "reserved" for points
>in the middle of a range. 

>Of course, there are other non-heat-map ways of presenting the data that might
>be more valuable, especially if the groups are divided by species. To many
>readers this is a critical take-home, so making sure the proper message is
>conveyed is important.

>4) The new human dataset they report ("Schonig") targets a plasmid introduced
>into human cells, not endogenous genes, and thus may not be terribly
>representative. This major caveat needs to be mention in main text, not just
>methods. Likewise, the importance attributed to this new dataset in the text
>doesn't match the scale of it. They use only 24 sgRNAs, and thus the size of
>the dataset needs to be greatly expanded and assessed at endogenous loci if the
>authors want to highlight this as a key finding (e.g. appearing in the
>abstract) that is likely to generalize well or serve as a 'tiebreaker' between
>different scoring algorithms.

>5) The off-target analysis is nice, although the source of the poor performance
>of several websites (as noted by Tsai et al.) was recently reported (Doench et
>al. 2016). The removal of the two outlier guides from Tsai et al. is probably a
>good idea, but would be best to carry it along for awhile and show they are
>truly outliers, rather than dismiss them originally. Figure 2 might be a nice
>place to do this.

>6) For the off-target analysis, do the high AUCs achieved by the Hsu et al. MIT
>score suggest that chromatin context does not plat a large role in determining
>activity? The authors could comment.

>7) I asked a colleague who is more versed in python to attempt to download and
>run the relevant files, and she ran into difficulties. Her comments: "I could
>not get the command line tool to run and ran into issues with BWA installation
>and indexing of the human genome. I tried debugging a little but that didn't
>help much and the code is throwing different errors now. The errors have
>something to do with the BWA index files, I think. It would really help if they
>included more documentation about BWA installation and getting the right index
>files for the human/mouse genome. When I indexed the human genome using BWA, I
>didn't get all the files they have in their sample S.cerevisiae index. Not sure
>if it's a BWA version issue (they should probably mention the version they
>recommend). An example input/output file would also be helpful."
This is great - referees often do not look at source code at all. Thanks!

Minor Points
>1) Fig. 2: The two blue colors are difficult to distinguish; why do MIT score
>for freq. >1% but not Cropit or CCTop or Hsu? Perhaps split into two panels,
>one comparing the score with all data and one for >1%?

>2) Fig. 3 uses CRISPOR Guide Specificity Score but nowhere in the main text do
>they define what they are using to calculate this - I can assume it is the use
>of BWA to find off-target sites and then the Hsu scoring scheme, but this
>should be explicitly stated.

>3) SFig3: legend says 4 and 5 mismatches, axis label says 5 and 6.

Reviewer #2: 

>2) The authors only included about 200 validated off-targets in their
>comparative analysis. This is considered a small dataset, as one gRNA may be
>associated with many off-targets at the genome level. In contrast, the training
>datasets on potency analysis included thousands of gRNAs. The small dataset on
>off-target analysis may not be able to provide an objective evaluation of
>various algorithms.
Finding unknown off-targets is much harder than quantifying known on-targets.
200 off-targets is as much as all published off-target studies together have produced 
until now. If 200 is not enough, then no one will be able in the near future to satisfy
reviewer 2's standards.  We still think 200 are enough data to compare
off-target scoring algorithms.

>3) The authors used correlation coefficients to evaluate various algorithms for
>prediction of gRNA efficiency. This is not likely a fair comparison. As
>explicitly stated in the Doench study, the major goal of the scoring scheme was
>to pick a few highly active gRNAs for further experimental studies, but not
>about the overall correlation with all gRNA candidates. Thus, the authors
>should pick a few top predictions from each algorithm and compare the
>performance of these selected gRNAs with independent validation data.
Yes, we agree. This is why supplemental figure 5 shows the results of a purely
precision/recall based analysis when predicting the top 20%. The results 
by and large match the correlation-based results.

>4) The authors claimed that they included "all" available on-target efficiency
>algorithms against "all" available datasets. This is not true. As far as I
>known, multiple relevant algorithms are not referenced by this study. For
>example, WU-CRISPR (Genome Biology, 2015), an algorithm to pick efficient
>gRNAs, was not referenced by this study.
While we did include WU-CRISPR in Fig4 ("wong" score), we did forget to add the
reference to the article to the main text of the paper. Wong et al was
published only shortly before our own submission, these modifications were made
in a rush, sorry for that.

You write "multiple relevant algorithms". Are you aware of any other algorithm 
we did not include?


>Further, this study is not the
>"first" time to evaluate existing CRISPR design methods. Multiple published
>studies have performed similar analyses, sometimes even by generating new
>independent experimental datasets.
We are unaware of an independent comparison of CRISPR scoring algorithms.
Can you give us one reference? We know that authors of scoring
datasets/algorithms have done their own comparisons, but that is not
independent and limited to the Doench (efficiency) or the MIT off-target score.


